The Joe Rogan experience.
It's a perfect time to have you on, I mean, this is, uh, I mean,
when we're talking about free speech in the time when the president of the
United States has been banned off of Twitter and Facebook and it's right,
it's a wild time. What, what do you make of that?
Well, you know, Facebook and Twitter,
our private publishers, right? I mean,
whatev we don't exactly know what they are.
They're not exactly like the times or like, uh, NBC or,
uh, ABC. Um, but they're close. They're,
they're certainly in the private sector and,
and the private sector has always had, has always had the discretion.
It's their first amendment, right.
To decide who to publish and who not to publish. Um, you know,
it's different with Facebook and Twitter because they claim to be, uh,
platforms like the telephone company that, you know,
anybody can use to have a conversations, but they're,
they're not quite, they, they really are a lot like a publisher and, you know,
the times decided to fire one of its columnists, uh,
cause it didn't like what he wrote. They have a first amendment right. To do so.
And they're not the government. So, you know, in that, to that extent,
um,
Facebook and Twitter did is perfectly legal and,
and not really different than what a publisher or a broadcasting company would
do if it decided to, uh, to change or,
or fire one of its one of its anchors or one of its, uh, columnists.
Um, on the other hand, the, they are sort of like a platform,
uh, like a, an electronic soapbox that they've erected in a, in,
in a park and invited everybody and anybody to come.
And when they start picking and choosing, uh, no, you are not good.
You're not good. You're okay. You know, you know, they,
when they start being a gatekeeper, uh, you run the risk of them,
closing people out of, of, uh,
a national dialogue and depriving people of an audience basically.
And that that's a problem. And, uh, it's a problem.
We haven't figured out how to work out yet. Uh,
because this medium is infancy. You know, it's people forget that,
that the printing press started in the 15th century in 1400 and something.
And it took hundreds of years before, uh, uh,
uh, freedom of the press and, uh,
worked itself out in ways that we're familiar with now. And we are, you know,
we are right at the big beginning of this, um, internet, speech, um,
medium. And, uh, it's hard. It's hard. It's hard to say. Uh,
I, I,
I think Facebook and Twitter had the right to do what they did in
banning Trump. Um, uh,
but the question is if they start banning anything
that they don't like,
then they're really closing off the public conversation to people
and what, what's the criteria? How do you do that?
Yeah, it, it's also,
it seems to me that what you using these outdated things to compare,
like, uh,
comparing it to the printing press or comparing Facebook or Twitter to
publishers, or even comparing them to something like a utility, like the,
the power there, there's something new, there's something completely different.
And we, I mean,
I hope it's not gonna take hundreds of years to have some sort of a freedom of
expression online in these things, but they're monopolies.
It's not like anybody could have bought or made a printing press and printed
their own books or printed their own newspapers.
Not everyone can make their own Twitter, you know, it's too,
it's so complex and there's so many users on it. It,
it there's very few places.
Or you could like legitimately get your word out in a way that you can with
Twitter or express yourself. Right.
Well, but you know, and it's true that these,
this medium is analogous to utilities in some ways
analogous, uh, to publishes in some ways, but they are new. Yeah.
And they're different. They that's right. But,
but consider this when I was growing up, uh, I was a teenager in the fifties,
um,
a big problem with free speech and the democratization of free speech
was that nobody had access to anything. I mean,
you had the times you had the Washington post, you had the newspapers,
you had NBC and ABC and CBS,
and that's where most speech occurred and nobody had access to that. Mm.
Um, so even with, even with the monopolistic bands, uh,
that Twitter and Facebook, uh, are doing these days,
or can do have the power to do, um, the fact is, is that,
uh, many, many millions, more of people,
ordinary people have access to huge audiences, uh, than did,
uh, 50 years ago. Um, uh, you know, if,
if you couldn't get into the times and you couldn't get into the Washington
post, and if you couldn't get onto the television, um, you could speak,
you were free to speak, but nobody heard you. Yeah. Um, and so, you know,
it's a lot better now, even,
even with questions about abusing the
power of, of being a gatekeeper that Twitter and Facebook have.
Yeah. It's, uh, it's just such a strange time for this cuz it's, uh,
in the middle of the, like we're at the end of the president's run,
he's still in office, but yet he's, you know,
everybody wants him out as quickly as possible because you you're wondering what
he's gonna do. And he can't really express himself, uh, publicly anymore. It's,
it's just so strange.
Yeah. Well of course, you know, he's still the president.
If he held the press conference, uh, everybody would cover it. That's true. Um,
and he, you know, if, if, uh, I used to say, uh,
back in the day that, uh, you know,
my father was a construction worker with a fifth grade education and, uh,
if he had something to say, he could say it to me,
he could say it to our family at Thanksgiving, but, uh,
he didn't have access to an audience of the kind that Roosevelt had
when he went on the radio and he couldn't get into the times as easily as,
as the governor of New York,
if the governor of New York held the press conference. So, you know, it isn't,
it, it isn't different in that, in that respect,
I'm not too worried about a president not having access, uh,
to a public audience. A president has tremendous power, uh,
to attract the tension and, and that, that was true a hundred years ago.
Um, what I'm worried about are ordinary people.
What I'm worried about are, are, are people like you, um,
uh, people, you know, who have something to say, um,
but their freedom is that they get to say it in the closet, you know,
where nobody hears them. Uh, you know, there, there's an interesting story.
Uh, a real case that happened in the sixties, uh,
when James Meredith, who was the first black person to, uh,
enter the university of Mississippi, uh, was shot when,
uh, on his first day there. And it was a, it was a real outrage.
It was in the early sixties and a, uh, a man named Sydney street. Uh,
a black guy living up in Harlem in New York, uh,
was so angered that, you know, he, he,
he wanted to American ideals, uh,
American principles of Liberty and equal rights have just gone up and smoked
today.
And if he had stood on a street corner at 140 fifth street in Harlem
and stood up on a soap box and said that the only people who would've heard him
were a few dozen and people who passed him on that street corner.
So what he did is he got out on the street corner and he burned an American
flag. Uh, it was his flag. He owned it.
So he wasn't destroying anybody else's property.
He burned the American flag and by burning the American flag,
he attracted television cameras,
which his words by themselves ELs would not have attracted.
So the television cameras came and he got to say,
I'm burning this flag to symbolize the fact that if a guy like James America
could get shot just for going to school, uh,
America's ideals have gone up and smoke.
And he got onto the six o'clock news and,
and millions of people heard it, heard his words,
and he was prosecuted for burning the flag, which was a crime at the time.
And his case eventually went up to the Supreme court and the Supreme court
overruled it and said it was symbolic speech. Uh, but,
but the reason that I'm telling that story is that, is that it,
it, it demonstrates how before there was an internet,
people had to figure out dramatic things to do, uh,
to get their message, uh, to more than a handful of people. And that's why,
you know, Benjamin spot burn draft cards, that's, that's,
that's why Sydney street burned the flag. Uh,
that's why there were demonstrations, uh,
instead of just instead of just words and, and, uh, you know,
it worked all right, uh, for some people, but for the most part, uh,
most people could not get their mess messages out to large audiences until the
internet came.
And so even with Twitter and Facebook acting
as gatekeepers in ways that trouble us, uh,
because we don't know what the limits are. We don't know what the standards are,
and we don't know why we should be having these private people decide
who gets to hear what, uh, but even with that, um, this,
the ability of ordinary people today to reach
huge audiences with whatever it is they want to say is much,
much larger. I mean, by,
by orders of magnitude larger than was 30 or 40 or 50 years ago.
Oh, unquestionably. Um,
but it just concerns me when a corporation has the ability to dictate,
even if it's a, a problem president, even if it's someone is as crazy as Trump,
just when a corporation gets together and they decide,
decide that this guy can't use their platform anymore, uh,
a platform that hundreds of millions of people use. It just,
it just seems very strange. Well.
It, it is, it is, it is a problem because there are no standards. Right.
And that's what,
that's what I mean when I say we're just the beginning of thinking about how,
how to, how to do that. I mean, here's, here's what, what I see as the issue,
uh, um, if you allow Facebook and Twitter
to make these decisions in the same way that you allow the times in the
Washington post and, and, and television networks, uh, to decide what,
what they publish, um, then you run the risk of,
of arbitrary exclusions, uh, from,
from people's speech, reaching large audiences, um,
not just the president who has alternative alternative means, uh,
but ordinary people, the only way to remedy that
is by law.
The only way to remedy that is to give the government the power to regulate
what these corporations can do.
And all of our history shows that if you give the government the power
to regulate speech,
you're gonna in a lot worse shape than if you allow the private
sector to do it,
because who in the government are you gonna give that power to? Hmm. Um,
you're gonna give it to Trump. You're gonna give it to Giuliani.
You're gonna give it to Joe McCarthy. Um, you're gonna give it, you know, to,
to, to Roosevelt are in the war who might have, uh,
barred Japanese Americans from speaking to large audiences. I mean,
who are you gonna give that power to?
And our entire history shows that the only way to regulate
private power is through government power.
And if you regulate speech through government power and you give of the
government, the power to decide who gets to speak and who doesn't get to speak,
we will be in far worse shape, uh, than we are in,
in having the private set to do that.
Catch new episodes that Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify,
watch back catalog Jr E videos on Spotify,
including clips E easily seamlessly switch between video
and audio experience on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can
download episodes to save on data cost. All for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episode.
You just need to search for the Jerry on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.